From Hanselman and stuff. It's
Hansel minutes or weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 12 recorded Monday, April 3rd, 2006.
Support for handsome. And it's
just provided by exceeds zip
for.net, which lets you handle
zip tar and jesus' files
on FTP servers and streams
in memory and more online
at  dot com slash
DT two. And by Peter
bloom.com start with better controls.
Finish with better sites online@peterblum.com.
Support is also provided by
dotnet developers journal. World's leading
dotnet developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott covers
the top 10 coolest windows
utilities. You don't know, you
already have Carl Franklin and you're
listening to Hansel minutes. I'm
here with Scott as always,
but this time I'm recording
from my hotel room in
Orlando, Florida, just as the
fireworks start at Epcot, right?
Five miles away from here.
What do you think about
that? Scott? Fantastic. So what
are we talking about today?
Well, this is the top
10 little known windows utilities
slash features that you may
already have in the tradition
of having really long top
10 list names. Alright, full-stop
decided to be great. So
we're going to go in
increasing order to the ones
that this is actually, I'm
not an arbitrary order. I'm
putting the ones I think
are cooler towards the end.
So that way you're on
the hook to stay around
and find out what's going
on. Okay, great. Obvious and
simple. First one is, or
number 10 rather is dragging
while all tabbing or dragging
to the task bar. A
lot of people don't realize
that when you start a
drag, you pick up a
file or you pick up
a folder. You can drag
with one hand. So you've
picked up. I'm dragging right
now. I'm not letting go
of my left mouse button.
I can actually all tab
so I can pick a
file up off my desktop,
all tab, go over to
outlook over to an email,
go over to word and
then drop the file directly
on the drop spot. Very
cool. Seems like a simple
thing, but I watch a
lot of people moving their
windows around, trying to get
things prepared to drag. That's
right. You've already got all
this stuff and your task
list. You can just, you
can just all tab and
drag. And then I know
that if you have a
window in the foreground and
you drag a file from
a window, that's in the
background, it will stay in
the background so you can
drag it onto it. Yup.
Yup. You can also know
you could also, I didn't
know. You could all tab
and you can also drag
down to the task bar.
Don't drop. Cause you can
make you can't drop things
in the task bar, drag
to the task hold. And
then as you hover over
the thing on the task
bar, it will jump to
the front. Then you can
go back up and drop
directly onto it. Wow. I
use that all the time.
I didn't know that I
did not know that that
is some wacky wacky wild
stuff. I understand you can
drag the task bar. Yeah,
very cool stuff. Number 10.
Cool. Hey number nine is
a little perplexing and actually
number nine was an unlist.
And then I was at
a Mike under Lloyd's site
at  dot com. Very
cool site. And he had
a link to someone called
I color folder. This is
a folder coloring tool at
shrinks.com/dpf. It's a whole utility
dedicated to the ability to
change your folders icons. Wow.
Pause for effect. But this
is already built into the
shell. You can right click
on any folder. You like
any folder, right? Clicking on
a folder on my desktop
right now, hit properties, click
on the fifth tab that
says customize. And there's a
section that says folder icons,
you can change your folders.
Now I do this. Now
a lot of people see
my really colorful desktop. I
like to have different folders
or different colors. That mean
different things. Cause if you've
just got a whole desktop
full of Manila, colored folders,
yellow colored folders, it doesn't
really tell you anything. There's
like 32 times 32 pixels,
completely wasted that could be
giving you some information. So
I'm not quite sure. And
then I realized when I
read the FAQ about this
particular utility, it said, and
we don't stay resident in
memory. We have a very
low footprint and I realized,
well, they're just writing to
the same file that windows
shell writes. Do the desktop
dot any file. When you
make a change like this,
there's a hidden file called
desktop dot any that refers
to the icon of your
particular folder. So this may
be a shiny utility and
wonderful. I don't use it
because it's built into Explorer.
So folder coloring is a
really great way to get
a productivity gain. And actually
I'll probably blog about this
and put up a bunch
of my colored folder icon
so people can, can jump
on the colored folder wagon
that the Mac users have
been holding over us for
the last several years. Excellent.
Cool. Number eight. You remember
subst? Sub S T. Yeah.
What is that? Subs is
substitute like substitute drive. That's
right. That was the dusk
man, right? Yeah. It's a
dos command. That's still around.
Yeah. And subs lets you
say, I want to make
this path a drive. So
you could like say subst
T colon space Seabeck slash
temp and then suddenly the
T drive would become your
temp drive. It's all coming
back to me. Ah, yes.
I put our happened to
sepsis. No, no, no. The
thing about subs that's cool
is that if you bring
up an Explorer window and
you've got the.net framework on
your machine, if you go
to see backslash windows backslash
assembly, you're going to see
the gack right. You'll see
the global assembly cache. And
what you're going to see
though is a lie. Okay?
That's not really a director.
If you look at your
columns, you're seeing a lie
there. You're seeing assembly name,
version, public key token. So
shell extension, it's a shell
extension. Exactly. But if you
go out to your command
line and you type say
subst, G colon C colon
backslash windows, backslash assembly, and
then instead of visiting, see
windows assembly, visit the G
drive that the newly created
G drive, you will see
what's really in the GAC,
the underneath of the GAC.
They won't know enough to
give you the lie. Very
cool. So what's cool about
this is that sometimes you
need to debug stuff. That's
in the GAC. You've already
added to the GAC, but
you're doing some development. So
you need to add your
PDBs, right? Your program, debug
files. And they have to
be in the GAC along
with the actual files so
you can debug them. So
if you subs a drive
to the GAC, you can
then sneak in there, see
the real directory structure, find
your files, put your PDBs
next to them. And you
can debug items that are
already in the GAC. Very,
very cool. Shiny is a
great use of that technology.
Totally. Generally, I don't like
subs. I know a lot
of people use it for
their build drives. They're like
everyone has to build on
the Z drive and then
one guy might have see
dev Fu and the other.
Guy's got C projects Fu
and they all subs their
drives to it. As a
way of finding common ground.
Instead of using subs, I
like to use junction points
or what's also called link
D junction points or something
that you already have built
in. This is something that
NTFS always supported except there
was never a utility to
get to it. The, the
windows NT four resource kit
and the windows 2000 resource
kit included a command line
utility called link D. But
the best one is a
thing called junction that you
can get from sysinternals. Everyone
loves sysinternals and then awhile
back, my buddy, Travis, Illig
made a, an icon that
would show up in Explorer
so that these junction points,
these folders, that point to
other folders would have a
little chain indicating that there
a junction, but he talked
to a guy named Herrmann
Schlegel Schnoodle S C H
I N a G L
as a I'm a good
German with a nag last
name Hanselman, but I don't
know how to pronounce this
gentleman's name. I'm not sure
Herman created a great thing
at shrinks.com/dpg and actually incorporated
Travis's suggestions and created what
he calls the hard link
shell extension. This is a
utility that lets you actually
write drag from one folder
to another. And then when
you write drag and let
go, he'll pop up an
option to say, make a
junction here. So this allows
you to write your build
files, your batch files, your
Emma's builds all your different
builds, relative paths. So like
for example, we've got an
SDK that we use and
everyone's got it installed somewhere
different, right? So with our
builds, I like to make
a folder called SDK and
then the person who's doing
the bill, no matter where
they've got the SDK installed,
they just make a pointer
to it, a junction to
it. This is something that's
built into the file system.
Very cool. Yeah, it is.
Which actually brings me smoothly
into number six Before we
get there, before we get
there, I w I want
to ask you, you've done
some shelf extension programming yourself,
right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I
was, I was just thinking
that might make a really
good a DNR TV. It
would, you know, shell extensions
are really powerful, but there's
one thing that I think
Microsoft and that everyone is
really punting on right now
is that you can only
have one version of the.net
framework loaded into a process
at a time. So what
happens if I write a
shell extension and.net one and
you write it and Dutton
at two, and we try
to live together nine times
out of 10, it works
just fine. But every once
in a while, probably my
shell extension, the one Ochella
extension of the one, one,
one won't work if two
O gets in first. So
there's some really cool stuff
going on right now about
shell extensions as a company
that made a, a shell
extension maker that literally made
it integrated individual studio release,
go file new shell extension.
But I think that people
are kind of missing the
point that there's three versions
of the.net framework out there.
And you really just don't
know which one's going to
get in memory At 1.1,
you're probably pretty safe, right?
For the most part, as
long as your shell extension
doesn't do any remoting outside.
I've worked with Michelle extension
from logic tech that did
some remoting and there's there's
problems remoting between one, one
and two. Oh, you'll get
this really obscure error that
says date time, men ticks
something. Something is not compatible.
It's kind of like the
classic sort of loading error.
That's showing that there's a
compatibility problem, but yeah, for
the most part it'll work.
But I just wanted to
warn people that when you're
making any kind of extension,
whether it be inside of
like MMC or it's explore,
if you don't own the
executable, then you can't count
on the right version of
the dotnet frame. Let's just
get right Aside for another
day. And we could do
a DNR TV on shell
extensions. Would ya? Totally cool.
Totally. So the fact that
Hermanns Michelle extension uses right,
dragging that means dragging with
the right mouse button and
then letting go, it gets
me into a cool little
known feature, number six, which
is right dragging there's so
many places where you can
drag something and drop with
a right mouse button and
get a different feature. I
mean, the obvious one is,
of course it's explore. If
you pick anything up and
explore and right drag it
you'll get move, copy, create
shortcut. But a lot of
people don't realize that this
works in outlook and word.
You can like go into
word type a bunch of
words, select one, and then
write drag it. And you'll
actually get a context menu
about moving, copying, or linking
to that word. Wow. A
lot easier than the whole
cut copy paste, paste, special
thing, and a really right
clicking and right. Dragging will
set you free no matter
what you're doing. That's cool.
You don't really think of
that much. I know for
new you new windows, it
takes them a long Time
to get conditioned to the
right mouse button, you know,
get used to it because
it's not discovered I'm talking
mere mortals here. Yeah. But
it's, I mean, it's not,
it's, it's reasonable though, because
it's not discoverable. Right. Why
was the start menu added
to windows 95? It's because
our monkey will never double
click. Right? If you go
into like pro you know,
program manager and windows three,
one, it's just, there's not
discoverable. Oh, DoubleClick. Oh, that's
so obvious. Triple click. You
know, it's not obvious. Like
if you go into word
right. DoubleClick, we'll select a
word. Right. You know that
you can go and double
click, get a word. If
you triple click in Microsoft
word, what happens? Select the
whole paragraph, right? Yeah. Yeah.
Totally discoverable. Right. Completely obvious.
But quadruple, he doesn't do
anything. So these kinds of
UI things are not particularly
discoverable, but once you do
find them, it's very hard.
Yep. So the next one
is number five windows hotkeys.
And I mean specifically hotkeys
that use the windows key.
Yeah. Jeff Atwood windows. He
brings up Explorer. For example,
exactly. Jeff Atwood actually listed
them all out at shrinks.com/d
P H at his very,
very good coding horror site.
And he's got a list
bar coding. R H O
R R O R. Okay.
Just checking. Yeah. Shrinks your.com.
Not coding whore. Thank you
for taking it there. Okay.
What's she going to say
that I just, I took
it there, then got shrinks.
your.com/dph. Jeff. That was a
fantastic writer. And his, his,
his site is a gym.
I read it every day
and he's got a whole
list of them up there.
And he points out that
where those keys and like
window E for Explorer and
window M for minimize when
key, which is a utility
that is specializes in making
the windows key, bind, double
to other things, right. Is
a great thing. It turns
out that the company that
makes Winky is no longer
distributing it, but I found
a download@shrinks.com slash DPI. So
grab yourself a copy of
wind key and know that
it's no longer supported, but
it's rock and sweet and
a squirrel it away. Because
one day you won't be
able to find a copy
anywhere online. It turns out
the company found it too
much of a support burden.
So they decided to move
on to other things. Wow.
Great tip. Yeah. Okay. Number
four is command lines other
than command. Right now, we
talked about monad in our
last, so monads an obvious
example, but it turns out
there are other shells command
line utilities within windows that
exist already. The first one
is a thing called w
M I C. So if
you go out to the
command line, you got to
CMD dot exe and you
type in WMI C you'll
get a windows management instrumentation
shell. This is a shell
that just does WMI. Cool.
So you can go out
there and type queries and
things that you would be
ordinarily to write a WMI
program to do. Like you
could say, process where description
equals explored at exe. And
you can get information about
the Explorer that he actually
process. You can poke around
all throughout the WMI namespaces
and see all the information
that's there. It lets you
browse schemas query all the
different classes you can work
with. Remote computers, make aliases,
you can write specific scripts
for a, an administrator of
a large network. It's just
one more thing. One more
quick, you know, arrow in
your quiver. That, and I
was totally surprised. It's like,
whenever you type something at
the command line and you
see a result that you've
never seen before, and you
didn't realize it was installed
that all the while. It's
pretty cool. It's like discovering,
you know, discovering gold. Absolutely.
That's w mic that's a
trickster.com/dpj. Okay. I had never
seen that one before today.
Did you? No, I never
heard of it. A net
net. S H this is
a good one. I'd actually
use this one, but not
to the depths of what
it can do. Net S
H a shrinker.com/dpk. This is
a tool that lets you
do all the kinds of
things you would do from
the network interface properties window
from the command line. So
you can go type net
sh you could say add
server and then add a
DHCP server. You can go
if you want it to
like uninstalling IPV six, sometimes
that can screw up people's
machines. I've got information up@shrinksor.com
slash DPL. You can type
net sh interface, IPV six
uninstalled. But the most useful
thing I found that you
can do with Nettis H
is I actually got my
system into such a boogered
up way that when I
ran IP config from the
command line, it did nothing.
Hey, here's a nice little
tip for you with IP
config is that, you know,
sometimes you'll have a bad
DNS entry because you're working
on sites and editing DNS
entries, and you go in
there, something gets in there,
that's wrong. You go and
change it. And the DNS
server, and it doesn't change
in your, on your client
because of the time to
live and all that stuff.
So there's a local DNS
cache associated with your connection.
If you type IP config
slash flush DNS, it'll remove
it from the cash. That's
kind of the control F
five equivalent site bus through
that. Don't trust me. I
want fresh DNS. Absolutely. Right?
Absolutely. And I'd like to
remind everybody that Hansel minutes
is made possible this week
by exceeds zip for.net, which
lets you handle zip tar
and G zip files on
FTP servers in streams, in
memory and more online@shrinksor.com slash
D T two Net sh
will let you reset your
entire stack. So you can
say net sh interface, IP
reset. And this has saved
me two or three different
times when I got my
system into all sorts of
weird States by basically rebuilding
my whole little IP stack
under windows XP. I could
have used that tonight. My
connections weren't working at all
and rather than having to
log off and log back
on and that kind of
stuff. Yeah, totally. And you
can read Scott's post about
that. It shrinks for.com/d T
one. So what's next. Moving
on, we're getting into the
top three here from the
command line. Are you familiar
with push D and pop
D no. So go out
to the command line and
just what directory do you
drop into? Probably documented settings
and settings. Yeah. Okay. So
go and say like push
D all one word space
and then a period and
then CD off into like
the windows directory, right. CD
slash windows. Okay. So then
you're kind of off doing
some stuff and then you
go and say, pop D
just pop D and then
hit enter. Cool. There's actually
a stack of directories where
you've been. So you know
how a lot of people
write batch files that keep
track of where they are
and you have to go
CD dot, dot cd.dot slash.dot.
And you do all this
dancing with pushy and pop
D sometimes you just want
to go back to where
you were. Great. Now the
cool tip on top of
that is setting your command
prompt differently. And Craig and
Dara turned me on to
this and I've got this
up at shrinker.com/dpn. You know
how people used to customize
their command prompts and the
dos days and still do
it. Now, if you say
set prompt equals slash P
slash P excuse me, set
prompt equals dollar sign P
where P is path a
dollar sign underscore were underscored
means new line dollar sign
plus sign. Plus sign is
going to tell you the
depth you are within the
stack and then dollar sign
G again, all of this
up at shrinks.com/dpn. You type
this prompt. You'll actually get
a plus sign right before
the greater than that. You're
used to seeing that we'll
show you how deep in
the push D stack you
are. No kidding. So then
you can see push D
you'll see a plus push
the, again, you'll see a
second. Plus, this lets you
write very robust batch files
where you can get right
back to where you were
before and not have any
trouble because you CD dot
dotted one too many times.
Dude. That is sweet. Yeah.
So big. Thanks to Craig
Adair for that tip shrinking.com/dp.
That's awesome. I'm going to
use that tomorrow. RFC. This
is, this is, this is
what the minutes is for
man. I'm going to use
that tomorrow. If I can
help, if I can change
the life of just one
child here on the moon,
Teach a man to fish.
Yeah, dude. Totally. And then
within number three, cause we're
talking about moving around with
directories and stuff, you know,
you just can't say enough
nice things about tab completion,
right? Okay. So like we're
down here at the command
prompt and we're doing push
D and pop D and
one of the things that
just cannot help you too
much is the tab completion
stuff, right? We've all remembered
early versions of windows 2000
where we'd go into the
registry and set the tab
completion character ourselves, right? Patrick Caldwell
reminded me today that how
many things the tab completion
can do for you. You
give it just the slightest,
hint that what you want
to do and you hit
tab and they'll help you
out. You type CD, you
know, doc and you hit
tab. It automatically puts in
SQL and backslash documents and
settings all in quotes, correct
for you. And then of
course, shift tab gets you
to the other options tab
and shift at school. A
lot of people think it's
just a simple step forward,
give you some auto-completion, but
it's so much more also
the depth of wildcards that
it'll take. You can say
star food star and you
can find a directories or
files where Fu is in
the middle. Ah, you know,
sometimes you don't have full
wildcard support, but the stuff
at the command line is
just very well enabled for
command lands, where anything DIR
understands. It will understand. Cool.
So yeah, if, you know,
if you, if you use
tab completion, but you don't
think you really use it
to the fullest that alongside
push D pop D and
a customized prompt can really
make you a Ninja at
the command line. Absolutely cool.
Number two, people may not
think this is an appropriate
number two, but I think
it is cause I'm all
about the big fonts, right?
Changing your console font, you
know how you can bring
up a command line and
you go and click in
the upper left hand corner
there and say properties, you
get a choice. You get
this really lame choice between
Lucetta console and then some
bitmap fonts from 1985, you
can control what goes in
that font window. If you've
got another Manoa type font
that you really like, maybe
the font that you use
for programming with you can
modify the registry and get
your own fonts in there.
And I've got details at
dot com slash DPO
and George Riley actually expanded on
that and made a registry
key that makes it even
easier registry a registry file
that you can run at
trickster.com/dpp. So a lot of
people have been stealing like
the consolers font from the
Longhorn disks or from office
12 there's if you search
for program or font on
Google, there's a million different
monospace fonts. You know, you're
not relegated just to Curry,
you're new. So I would
encourage people to check out
in, you know, customizing their
environment. I like to make
my font. I use console
us. I go black background
on a green screen. I
use a 24 point font
because I want those dots
to work for me, man,
high DPI, shiny, very And
the number one, cool utility
and or cool thing about
windows this week. Who's all
the million other command line
utilities that you already have,
but don't know about, wow.
I was writing up a
list of these myself and
I went up to a
Google to check on one
of them and discovered shrink,
stir.com/dpq, which is a list
of all the crazy utilities
you've never heard of that
exists already on your system,
including ones that aren't documented.
Now, these aren't things that
you have to download. These
are awesome Already on your
system. You have these now.
So why don't you go
out to a command line?
We'll do them together here.
Excellent. So the first one
is FSU tail file system
util all sorts of things
about managing the volumes, managing
your disks file specific commands
file system information. And these
are, these are guaranteed to
exist on what On windows
XP in 2003. Okay. Yeah.
So like for example, I
mean it might be something
as simple as FSU till
space Fs InfoSpace drives gives
you a list of all
of your current drives. That's
pretty simple, but there's lots
of different other things like
FSU, tail Fs info, volume
info, you get details about
all of your different drives,
whether or not they support
case sensitivity, whether or not
support Unicode in their file
names, whether or not they
support Ackles, whether they support
compression, it's a capability querier
of your file system, FSU
tail. These are all things
you could put into your
batch files and your various
utilities. Cause you can count
on these being there all
the time. So here's another
crazy one. If you go
to your command line and
you type you DC edit,
this is a thing called
the private character editor, EDU
D C edit the sexy,
a weird, I had no
idea this was on my
system. This is a utility
that you could actually build
your own font from. It's
a private character editor. So
I'm not really sure quite
why or why it's useful
or interesting. There's lots of
other font building tools, but
I always find it creepy
to know my machine completely
and then discover an application
that I had no idea
existed. And this one has
a full UI for editing
fonts. It's crazy. Wow. Yeah,
totally. Some useful stuff that
you can use on like
your mom's machine or a
machine you come upon that
maybe boogered up is you
can type S F C
it's the system file checker.
This is the thing that
will go through all of
your windows protected system files.
And it will basically overwrite
and replace the quote unquote
incorrect versions with Microsoft versions.
So if you think that
you've got a machine that's
been compromised or has got
an, an invalid driver on
it, or somehow has become
corrupted, SFC is a tool
you can use to scan
your system either on boot
or scan immediately and potentially
bring it back from the,
from the brink. Wow. And
then within the context of
drivers, if you type driver
query just one word driver
query from the command line,
you'll get a complete list
of all of the drivers
that are running on your
system. And there's all sorts
of things. If you type
driver query slash question Mark,
that lets you basically enumerate
and list all the different
installed device drivers and their
properties, and even out put
them as a, a CSB
file. Couple of other quick
utilities, disk part is a
disc partitioning tool. Another kind
of hidden command line that
you can use very dangerous.
Don't hurt yourself. Yup. Yup.
Open files. Apparently we'll let
you see all of the
different files that are open
on your, on your shares
and also enable your local
file tracking. So you can
see all the open files
in your system currently. Awesome.
Yep. S C service control
is like a net stop
or net start on steroids.
It lets you manage services
and control services from the
command line. And then the
last one, which I thought
was kind of cool is
get Mac G T Mac
lets you basically get the
Mac addresses. You know, I
always do IP config slash
all, but now get Mac
just does it and tells
you the status of those
particular interfaces. Pretty cool stuff.
That is sweet. That's our,
that's our number one thing,
a million other command line
utilities that you already have.
Very cool. Scott, anything else?
Yeah. So I wanted to
give a shout out. I
saw a pretty interesting site
that Jonathan Goodyear's company is
putting up called email and
the number two face. So
it's email to face.com and
this is a pretty clever
idea. I'm not sure how
they're going to get everyone
in the entire universe to
put their email addresses and
faces up there. But they're
basically storing a mapping between
your email address and your
face. So you can go
up there and you add
a small icon of your
face, maybe the one you
use for your instant messenger.
And I think that they
could probably come up with
some cool and creative ways
to integrate this with outlook
or different messaging tools. When
you have an email address
and you just want to
see that person's face, you
know how outlooks contacts form
lets you put their face
in, right? It'd be pretty
slick to have like a
web services interface or maybe
like just a simple HTP
get where I could get
someone's face from their email
address. So check out email
to face A real security
risk because it's not so
high resolution that it's any
sort of Yeah. It's not
like it's not email to
headshot. Yeah. It's not email
to high res retinal scan.
Exactly. Email, email to fingerprint.
Although I've got that idea
patented right now, Patent pending
Scott, this has been a
fabulous show. Thank you so
much. Great stuff as always.
And it makes me wonder
how many more of these
shows you got. I mean
there's a finite number of
cool things in the world
is there we'll have to
wait and see who hurts
you Carl Franklin who hurts you?
I think I've got a
few more in me. All
right. Until next week. This
is Carl Franklin Scott Hanselman saying
thanks for listening and have
a great week.